How bloodily the sun begins topeer above yon busky hill.
The day looks pale at hisdistemperature.
The southern wind doth play thetrumpet to his purposes,
and, by his hollow whistling inthe leaves,
foretells a tempest and ablustering day.
Then with the losers let itsympathize,
for nothing can seem foul tothose that win.
How now, my Lord of Worcester.
'Tis not well that you and Ishould meet
upon such terms as now we meet.
You have deceived our trust
and made us doff our easy robesof peace
to crush our old limbs inungentle steel.
This is not well, my lord.
This is not well.
What say you to it?
Will you again unknit thischurlish knot
of all-abhorred war
And move in that obedient orbagain
where you did give a fair andnatural light
and be no more an exhaledmeteor,
a prodigy of fear and a portentof mischief
to the unborn times?
Hear me, my liege.
For mine own part, I could bewell content
to entertain the lag-end of mylife with quiet hours,
for I protest,
I have not sought the day ofthis dislike.
You have not sought it?
How comes it, then?
Rebellion lay in his way, and hefound it.
Peace, chewet, peace!
It pleased your majesty to turnyour looks of favor
from myself and all our house.
And yet I must remember you, mylord,
we were the first and dearest ofyour friends.
For you, my staff of office didI break In Richard's time
and posted day and night to meetyou on the way
and kiss your hand,
while yet you were in place andin account
nothing so strong and fortunateas I.
It was myself, my brother, andhis son
who brought you home
and boldly did outdare thedangers of the time.
And being fed by us, you used usso
as that ungentle gull, thecuckoo's bird,
useth the sparrow: did oppressour nest,
grew by our feeding to so greata bulk
that even our love durst notcome near your sight
for fear of swallowing.
But with nimble wing, we wereenforced,
for safety sake, to fly out ofyour sight
and raise this present head,
whereby we stand opposed by suchmeans
as you yourself have forgedagainst yourself
by unkind usage, dangerouscountenance,
and violation of all faith andtroth
sworn to us in your youngerenterprise!
These things indeed you havearticulate,
proclaim'd at market-crosses,read in churches,
to face the garment of rebellionwith some fine color
that may please the eye
of fickle changelings and poordiscontents,
which gape and rub the elbow atthe news
o hurlyburly innovation.
And never yet did insurrectionwant
such water-colors to impaint hiscause,
nor moody beggars, starving fora time
of pellmell havoc and confusion.
In both our armies, there ismany a soul
shall pay full dearly for thisencounter
if once they join in trial.
Tell your nephew the Prince ofWales
doth join with all the world inpraise of Henry Percy.
By my hopes, this presententerprise set off his head,
I do not think a bravergentleman,
more active-valiant or morevaliant-young,
more daring or more bold, is nowalive
to grace this latter age withnoble deeds.
For my part, I may speak it tomy shame,
I have a truant been tochivalry,
and so I hear he doth account metoo.
Yet this before my father'smajesty.
I am content that he shall takethe odds
of his great name and estimation
and will, to save the blood oneither side,
try fortune with him in a singlefight.
And, Prince of Wales, so dare weventure thee,
albeit considerations infinitedo make against it.
No, good Worcester, no.
We love our people well.
Even those we love
that are misled upon yourcousin's part.
And, will they take the offer ofour grace,
both he and they and you,yea,every man,
shall be my friend again andI'll be his.
So tell your cousin,
and bring me word what he willdo.
But if he will not yield,
rebuke and dread correction waiton us,
and they shall do their office.
So be gone.
We will not now be troubled withreply.
We offer fair.
Take it advisedly.
It will not be accepted, on mylife.
The Douglas and the Hotspur bothtogether
are confident against the worldin arms.
Hence, therefore, every leaderto his charge,
for, on their answer, will weset on them.
And God befriend us,as our causeis just!
Hal, if thou see me down in thebattle and bestride me, so.
'Tis a point of friendship.
Nothing but a colossus can dothee that friendship.
Say thy prayers, and farewell.
I--
I would 'twere bed-time, Hal,and all well.
Why, thou owest God a death.
'Tis not due yet!
I would be loath to pay himbefore his day.
What need I be so forward withhim that calls not on me?
Well, 'tis no matter; honorpricks me on.
Yea, but how if honor prick meoff when I come on?
How then?
Can honor set to a leg?
No, or an arm?
No, or take away the grief of awound?
No.
Honor hath then no skill insurgery?
What is honor?
A word.
What is in that word "honor"?
What is that honor?
Air.
A trim reckoning.
Who hath it?
He that died o' Wednesday.
Doth he feel it?
No.
Doth he hear it?
'Tis insensible, then
Yea, to the dead.
But will it not live with theliving?
No.
Why?
Detraction will not suffer it.
Therefore, I'll none of it.
Honor is a mere scutcheon.
And so ends my catechism.
O, no, Sir Richard, my nephewmust not know
the liberal and kind offer ofthe king.
'Twere best he did.
Then are we all undone.
It is not possible, it cannotbe,
the king should keep his word inloving us.
He will suspect us still andfind a time
to punish this offense in otherfaults.
Therefore, dear cousin, let notHarry know,
in any case, the offer of theking.
Deliver what you will; I'll say'tis so.
My uncle is return'd.
Deliver up my Lord ofWestmoreland.
Uncle, what news?
The king will bid you battlepresently.
Defy him by the Lord ofWestmoreland.
Lord Douglas, go you and tellhim so.
Marry, I shall, and verywillingly.
There's no seeming mercy in theking.
Did you beg any?
God forbid.
I told him gently of ourgrievances,
of his oath-breaking, which hemended thus
by now forswearing that he isforsworn.
He calls us rebels, traitors,
will purge with haughty armsthis hateful name in us.
Arm, gentlemen; to arms.
I have thrown a brave defiancein King Harry's teeth,
and Westmoreland, that wasengaged, did bear it.
This cannot choose but bring himquickly on.
The Prince of Wales stepp'dforth before the king
and, nephew, challenged you tosingle fight.
Oh, would to God the quarrel layupon our heads
and that no man might draw shortbreath today
but I and Harry Monmouth.
Tell me, tell me, how show'd histasking?
Seem'd it in contempt?
No, by my soul, I never in mylife
did hear a challenge urged moremodestly,
unless a brother should abrother dare
to gentle exercise and proof ofarms.
He gave you all the virtues of aman,
trimm'd up your praises with aprincely tongue,
spoke to your deserving like achronicle,
making you ever better than hispraise
by still dispraising praisevalued with you.
And, which became him like aprince indeed,
he made a blushing cital ofhimself
and chid his truant youth withsuch a grace
as if he master'd there a doublespirit,
of teaching and of learninginstantly.
There did he pause.
But let me tell the world,
if he outlive the envy of thisday,
England did never own so sweet ahope,
so much misconstrued in hiswantonness.
Cousin, I think thou artenamored of his follies.
Never did I hear of any princeso wild a libertine.
But be he as he will, yet onceere night
I will embrace him with asoldier's arm
that he shall shrink under mycourtesy.
Arm, arm with speed.
And, fellows, soldiers, friends,
better consider what you have todo than I,
that have not well the gift oftongue,
can lift your blood up withpersuasion.
My lord, here are letters foryou.
I cannot read them now.
Oh, gentlemen, the time of lifeis short.
To spend that shortness baselywere too long,
if life did ride upon a dial'spoint,
still ending at the arrival ofan hour.
An if we live, we live to treadon kings;
if die, brave death, whenprinces die with us.
Now, for our consciences, thearms are fair
when the intent of bearing themis just.
My lord, prepare.
The king comes on apace.
I thank him that he cuts me frommy tale,
for I profess not talking, onlythis:
let each man do his best.
And here draw I a sword, whosetemper I intend to stain
with the best blood that I canmeet withal
in the adventure of thisperilous day.
Now, Esperance.
Percy.
And set on.
Sound all the lofty instrumentsof war,
and, by that music, let us allembrace.
For, heaven to earth, some of usnever shall
a second time do such acourtesy.
What is thy name,
that in this battle thus thoucrossest me?
What honors dost thou seek uponmy head?
Know then, my name is Douglas;
and I do haunt thee in battlethus
because some tell me thou art aking.
They tell thee true.
My Lord of Stafford dear todayhath bought thy likeness,
for instead of thee, King Harry,this sword has ended him,
which shall it thee,
unless thou yield thee as myprisoner.
I was not born a yielder, thouproud Scot,
and thou shalt find a king
that will revenge LordStafford's death.
Ohm Douglas, hadst thou foughtat Holmedon thus,
never had triumph'd upon a Scot.
All's done. All's won.
See; here, breathless lies theking.
Where?
Here.
This, Douglas?
No, I know this face full well.
A gallant knight he was.
His name was Blunt.
Semblably furnish'd like theking himself.
A fool go with thy soul, whitherit will.
A borrow'd title hast thoubought too dear.
Why didst thou tell me thou werta king?
The king has many marching inhis coats.
Then, by my sword, I will killall his coats.
I'll murder all his wardrobe,piece by piece,
until I find the king.
Up, and away!
Our soldiers stand full fairlyfor the day!
This way! Follow me!
Follow him, lads!
Come on! Hurry!
Come on, men!
Though I could 'scape shot-freeat London,
yet I fear the shot here.
Here's no scoring but upon thepate.
Soft!
Who are you?
Sir Walter Blunt.
There's honor for you.
I'm as hot as molten lead and asheavy.
God keep lead out of me!
I need no more weight than mineown bowels.
I have led my ragamuffins wherethey are peppered.
There's not three of my hundredand fifty left alive.
And they are for the town's end,to beg during life.
But who comes here?
What?
Stand'st thou idle here?
Lend me thy sword.
Many a nobleman lies stark andstiff
under the hoofs of vauntingenemies,
whose deaths are yet unrevenged.
I prithee, lend me thy sword!
Oh, Hal, I prithee, give meleave to breathe awhile.
Turk Gregory never did suchdeeds in arms
as I have done this day.
I have paid Percy. I have madehim sure.
He is, indeed, and living tokill thee.
I prithee, lend me thy sword!
Nay, before God, Hal, if Percybe alive,
thou get'st not my sword.
Take my pistol, if thou wilt.
Give it to me.
What, is it in the case?
Ay, 'tis hot. 'Tis hot.
There's that will sack a city.
What?
Is it a time to jest and dallynow?
Well, if Percy be alive, I'llpierce him.
If he do come in my way, so.
If he do not, if I come in hiswillingly,
let him make a carbonado of me.
I like not such grinning honoras Sir Walter hath.
Give me life, which, if I cansave, so.
If not, honor comes unlookedfor,
and there's an end.
This way! Follow me!
I prithee, Harry, withdrawthyself.
Thou bleed'st too much.
Lord John of Lancaster, go youwith him.
Not I, my lord, unless I didbleed too.
I do beseech your majesty, makeup,
lest your retirement do amazeyour friends.
I will do so.
My Lord of Westmoreland, go youwith him.
Come, come, my lord; I'll leadyou to your tent.
Lead me, my lord?
I do not need your help.
And God forbid a shallow scratchshould drive the Prince of Wales
from such a field as this,
where stain'd nobility liestrodden on
and rebels' arms triumph inmassacres.
We breathe too long.
Come, cousin Westmoreland.
Our duty this way lies.
For God's sake, come.
By God, thou hast deceived me,Lancaster.
I did not think thee lord ofsuch a spirit.
Before, I loved thee as abrother, John.
Now I do respect thee as mysoul.
I saw him hold Lord Percy at thepoint
with lustier maintenance than Idid look for
of such an ungrown warrior.
Oh, this boy lends mettle to usall.
Another king.
They grow like Hydra's heads.
I am the Douglas, fatal to allthose
that wear those colors on them.
Who art thou that counterfeit'stthe person of a king?
The king himself, who, Douglas,
grieves at heart so many of hisshadows
thou hast met and not the veryking.
I have two boys seek Percy andthyself about the field.
But, seeing thou fall'st on meso luckily,
I will assay thee, so defendthyself.
I fear thou art anothercounterfeit.
Yet thou bear'st thee like aking.
But mine thou art, whoe'er thoube,
and thus I win thee.
Hold up thy head, vile Scot,
or thou art like never to holdit up again,
The spirits of valiant Shirley,Stafford, Blunt, are in my arms.
It is the Prince of Wales thatthreatens thee,
who never promiseth but he meansto pay.
Cheerly, my lord, how fares yourgrace?
Sir Nicholas Gawsey hath forsuccor sent,
and so hath Clifton.
I'll to Clifton straight.
Stay, and breathe awhile.
Thou hast redeem'd thy lostopinion
and show'd thou makest sometender of my life
in this fair rescue thou hastbrought to me.
O God!
They did me too much injury
that ever said I hearken'd foryour death.
If it were so, I might have letalone
the insulting hand of Douglasover you,
which would have been as speedyin your end
as all the poisonous potions inthe world
and saved the treacherous laborof your son!
Make up to Clifton.
I'll to Sir Nicholas Gawsey.
If I mistake not, thou art HarryMonmouth.
Thou speak'st as if I would denymy name.
My name is Harry Percy.
Why, then I see a very valiantrebel of the name.
I am the Prince of Wales, andthink not, Percy,
to share with me in glory anymore.
Two stars keep not their motionin one sphere,
nor can one England brook adouble reign
of Harry Percy and the Prince ofWales.
Nor shall it, Harry,
for the hour is come to end theone of us.
And would to God thy name inarms were now
as great as mine.
I'll make it greater ere I partfrom thee,
and all the budding honors onthy crest I'll crop
to make a garland for my head.
I can no longer brook thyvanities.
Oh!
Well said, Hal!
To it, Hal!
Nay, you shall find no boy'splay here,
I can tell you.
Oh, Harry, thou hast robb'd meof my youth.
I better brook the loss ofbrittle life
than those proud titles thouhast won of me.
They wound my thoughts worsethan thy sword my flesh.
But thoughts the slaves of life,and life time's fool.
And time itself, that takessurvey of all the world,
must have a stop.
Oh, I could prophesy,
but that the earthy and co--
cold hand of death lies on mytongue.
No, Percy, thou art dust andfood for--
For worms, brave Percy.
Fare thee well, great heart.
Ill-weaved ambition, how muchart thou shrunk.
When that this body did containa spirit,
a kingdom for it was too small abound.
But now two paces of the vilestearth
is room enough.
This earth that bears thee dead
bears not alive so stout agentleman.
If thou wert sensible ofcourtesy,
I should not make so dear a showof zeal.
But let my favors hide thymangled face.
And, even in thy behalf, I'llthank myself
for doing these fair rites oftenderness.
Adieu, and take thy praise withthee to heaven.
Thy ignominy sleep with thee inthe grave
but not remember'd in thyepitaph.
What, old acquaintance?
Could not all this flesh keep ina little life?
Poor Jack, farewell.
I could have better spared abetter man.
Oh, I should have a heavy missof thee
if I were much in love withvanity.
Death hath not struck so fat adeer today,
though many dearer, in thisbloody fray.
Embowell'd will I see thee byand by.
Till then, in blood by noblePercy lie.
Embowelled?
If thou embowel me to-day,
I'll give you leave to powder meand eat me too tomorrow.
'Sblood, twas time tocounterfeit,
or that hot termagant Scot hadpaid me scot and lot too.
Counterfeit?
I lie; I am no counterfeit.
To die is to be a counterfeit,
for he is but the counterfeit ofa man
who hath not the life of a man.
But to counterfeit dying when aman thereby liveth
is to be no counterfeit
but the true and perfect imageof life indeed.
The better part of valor isdiscretion,
in the which better part I havesaved my life.
'Zounds, I'm afraid of thisgunpowder Percy,
though he be dead.
How, if he should counterfeittoo and rise?
By my faith, I'm afraid
he'd prove the bettercounterfeit.
Therefore I'll make him sure.
Yea, and I'll swear I killedhim.
Why may not he rise as well asI?
Nothing confutes me but eyes,and nobody sees me.
Therefore, sirrah...
with a new wound in your thigh,come you along with me.
Come, brother John.
Full bravely hast thou flesh'dthy maiden sword.
But soft.
Whom have we here?
Did you not tell me this fat manwas dead?
I did.
I saw him dead.
Breathless and bleeding on theground.
Art thou alive?
Or is it some fantasy that playsupon our eyesight?
I prithee, speak.
We will not trust our eyeswithout our ears.
Thou art not what thou seem'st.
No, that's certain.
I am no double man.
But if I be not Jack Falstaff,then am I a Jack.
There is Percy.
If your father will do me anyhonor, so.
If not, let him kill the nextPercy himself.
I look to be either earl orduke,
I can assure you.
Percy I killed myself and sawthee dead.
Didst thou?
Lord, Lord, how this world isgiven to lying.
I grant, I was down and out ofbreath,
and so was he.
But we rose both at an instant
and fought a long hour byShrewsbury clock.
If I may be believed, so.
If not, let them that shouldreward valor
take the sin upon their ownheads.
I'll take it upon my death,
I gave him this wound in thethigh.
If the man were alive and woulddeny it,
'zounds, I'd make him eat apiece of my sword.
This is the strangest tale thatever I heard.
It is the strangest fellow,brother John.
Come; bring your luggage noblyon your back.
If a lie may do thee grace,
I'll gild it with the happiestterms I have.
The trumpet sounds retreat.
The day is ours.
Come, brother; let us to thehighest of the field
to see what friends are living,who are dead.
I'll follow, as they say, forreward.
He that rewards me, God rewardhim.
If I do grow great, I'll growless,
for I'll purge and leave sack
and live cleanly as a noblemanshould do.
Thus ever did rebellion findrebuke.
Ill-spirited Worcester.
Did not we send grace, pardon,and terms of love to all of you?
And wouldst thou turn our offerscontrary,
misuse the tenor of thykinsman's trust?
Three knights upon our partyslain today,
a noble earl and many a creatureelse
had been alive this hour if,like a Christian,
thou hadst truly borne betwixtour armies
true intelligence.
What I have done, my safetyurged me to,
and I embrace my fortunepatiently,
since not to be avoided it fallson me.
Bear Worcester to the death andVernon too.
Other offenders, we will pauseupon.
How goes the field?
The noble Scot, Lord Douglas,when he saw
the fortune of the day quiteturn'd from him,
the noble Percy slain,
and all his men upon the foot offear,
fled with the rest.
Falling from a hill,
he was so bruised that thepursuers took him.
At my tent, the Douglas is,
and I beseech your grace I maydispose of him.
With all my heart.
Brother John of Lancaster, toyou,
this honorable bounty shallbelong.
Go to the Douglas,
deliver him up to his pleasure,ransomless and free.
His valor shown upon our creststoday
hath taught us how to cherishsuch high deeds
even in the bosom of ouradversaries.
I thank your grace for this highcourtesy,
which I shall give awayimmediately.
Then this remains: that wedivide our power.
You, son John, and my cousinWestmoreland
towards York shall bend you withyour dearest speed
to meet Northumberland and theprelate Scroop,
who, as we hear, are busily inarms.
Myself and you, son Harry, willtowards Wales
to fight with Glendower and theEarl of March.
Rebellion in this land shalllose his sway,
meeting the cheque of suchanother day.
And since this business so fairis done,
let us not leave till all ourown be won.